README.md, before:

# [Loom Protocol](https://loomx.io)

Loom Protocol powers Basechain, an interoperable DPoS blockchain that is live in production, EVM-compatible, audited, and battle-tested.


## Prerequisites

* A running Linux or macOS system.
* Go 1.9+.
* Dep. For details about installing Dep, see the [Dep](https://github.com/golang/dep) page.
* (OPTIONAL) LevelDB.

  If you're running macOS, you can enter the following command to install LevelDB:

  ```shell
  brew install leveldb
  ```

  If you're running Linux, you can enter the following command to install LevelDB:

  ```shell
  apt-get install libleveldb-dev libleveldb1v5
  ```

* The `GOPATH` environment variable is defined.


## Build the binary

1. Set the value of the `LOOM_SRC` environment variable as follows:

  ```shell
  LOOM_SRC=$GOPATH/src/github.com/loomnetwork/loomchain
  ```
2. Clone the repository into the `$LOOM_SRC` directory:

  ```shell
  git clone git@github.com:loomnetwork/loomchain.git $LOOM_SRC
  ```

3. Install dependencies:

  ```shell
  cd $LOOM_SRC && make deps
  ```
4. Build the binary:

  ```shell
  make
  ```

5. Copy the `./loom` binary to a directory of your choice.


## Run

1. Use the following command to initialize the blockchain with the built-in contracts:

  ```shell
  ./loom init
  ```

2. Enter the following command to run the node:

  ```shell
  ./loom run
  ```

## Generate keys

Use the `loom genkey` command. It will create two files with the given names.

```shell
./loom genkey -a publicKeyFilename -k privateKeyFilename
```

## Ethereum smart contracts

1. Deploy smart contract by entering the `loom deploy` command:

  ```shell
  ./loom deploy -a pubkeyFile -k prikeyFile -b contractBytecode.bin
  New contract deployed with address:  default:0xB448D7db27192d54FeBdA458B81e7383F8641c8A
  Runtime bytecode:  [96 96 96 64 82 96 .... ]
  ```

2. Make a call to an already deployed contract with the `loom cal call` command:

  ```
  ./loom call  -a pubkeyFile -k prikeyFile -i inputDataFile -c 0xB448D7db27192d54FeBdA458B81e7383F8641c8A
  Call response:  [0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 219]
  ```

Details of encoding contract input data can be found in the [Solidity ABI documentation](https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/abi-spec.html).
You can use `static-call` similarly to run a read only method.

## Update Protobuf Messages

Enter the following command to update protobuf messages:

```shell
# build the Go plugin for protoc
make proto
```

> See the [Go Generated Code](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/go-generated) page for more details about how you can use the generated protobuf messages.

## Useful Links

* [Developer Documentation](https://loomx.io/developers/)

Commit message:

Update IAVL package revision to fix IAVL store test

README.md, after:

# [Loom Protocol](https://loomx.io)

Loom Protocol powers Basechain, an interoperable DPoS blockchain that is live in production, EVM-compatible, audited, and battle-tested.


## Prerequisites

* A running Linux or macOS system.
* Go 1.9+.
* Dep. For details about installing Dep, see the [Dep](https://github.com/golang/dep) page.
* (OPTIONAL) LevelDB.

  If you're running macOS, you can enter the following command to install LevelDB:

  ```shell
  brew install leveldb
  ```

  If you're running Linux, you can enter the following command to install LevelDB:

  ```shell
  apt-get install libleveldb-dev libleveldb1v5
  ```

* The `GOPATH` environment variable is defined.


## Build the binary

1. Set the value of the `LOOM_SRC` environment variable as follows:

  ```shell
  LOOM_SRC=$GOPATH/src/github.com/loomnetwork/loomchain
  ```
2. Clone the repository into the `$LOOM_SRC` directory:

  ```shell
  git clone git@github.com:loomnetwork/loomchain.git $LOOM_SRC
  ```

3. Install dependencies:

  ```shell
  cd $LOOM_SRC && make deps
  ```
4. Build the binary:

  ```shell
  make
  ```

5. Copy the `./loom` binary to a directory of your choice.


## Run

1. Use the following command to initialize the blockchain with the built-in contracts:

  ```shell
  ./loom init
  ```

2. Enter the following command to run the node:

  ```shell
  ./loom run
  ```

## Generate keys

Use the `loom genkey` command. It will create two files with the given names.

```shell
./loom genkey -a publicKeyFilename -k privateKeyFilename
```

## Ethereum smart contracts

1. Deploy smart contract by entering the `loom deploy` command:

  ```shell
  ./loom deploy -a pubkeyFile -k prikeyFile -b contractBytecode.bin
  New contract deployed with address:  default:0xB448D7db27192d54FeBdA458B81e7383F8641c8A
  Runtime bytecode:  [96 96 96 64 82 96 .... ]
  ```

2. Make a call to an already deployed contract with the `loom cal call` command:

  ```
  ./loom call  -a pubkeyFile -k prikeyFile -i inputDataFile -c 0xB448D7db27192d54FeBdA458B81e7383F8641c8A
  Call response:  [0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 219]
  ```

Details of encoding contract input data can be found in the [Solidity ABI documentation](https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/abi-spec.html).
You can use `static-call` similarly to run a read only method.

## Update Protobuf Messages

Enter the following command to update protobuf messages:

```shell
# build the Go plugin for protoc
make proto
```

> See the [Go Generated Code](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/go-generated) page for more details about how you can use the generated protobuf messages.

## Update vendored Go dependencies

Some of the Go dependencies are vendored using [Dep](https://golang.github.io/dep/). Most common
operation when dealing with the vendored dependencies is to update the Tendermint or IAVL
branch/revision. This can be done by updating the branch/revision in `Gopkg.toml` and then running
`dep ensure -update`.

For example:
```shell
dep ensure -v -update github.com/tendermint/iavl
```

## Useful Links

* [Developer Documentation](https://loomx.io/developers/)
